docs: add channel upgrade guide for NixOS version transitions (#7418)
nix-community/home-manager: docs/manual/upgrading.md

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-25.05";
    home-manager = {
      url = "github:nix-community/home-manager/release-25.05";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
  };

  outputs = { nixpkgs, home-manager, ... }: {
    homeConfigurations."yourusername" = home-manager.lib.homeManagerConfiguration {
      pkgs = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.x86_64-linux;
      modules = [ ./home.nix ];
    };
  };
}
```

Then update and rebuild:

```bash
nix flake update
home-manager switch --flake .
```

## Method 3: NixOS Module Integration

If you're using Home Manager as a NixOS module, update your system configuration:

```nix
# In your configuration.nix or flake.nix
{
  imports = [
    (builtins.fetchTarball "https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager/archive/release-25.05.tar.gz/nixos")
  ];

  # Your home-manager configuration
  home-manager.users.yourusername = { pkgs, ... }: {
    home.stateVersion = "25.05";
    # ... rest of your configuration
  };
}
```

Then rebuild your system:

```bash
sudo nixos-rebuild switch
```

## Updating State Version

Don't forget to update your Home Manager state version in your configuration:

```nix
{

>   home.stateVersion = "25.05";

Reviewer: This is not the case if I understand correctly, you should keep it at the initial release to keep consistent behavior?

Reviewer 2: Correct, its the opposite advice given. Although, I don't generally like gating things behind `stateVersion` and making the modules handle changes more gracefullly... we have a lot of state checks and bumping your state version will introduce different evaluation conditions throughout the project.

Author: So what should I do ?

Author: I edited the doc, do you confirm there's no other problems in the file ?

If you're using Home Manager with Nix flakes, update your `flake.nix`:

```nix
{
  description = "Home Manager configuration";

  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-25.05";
    home-manager = {
      url = "github:nix-community/home-manager/release-25.05";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
  };

  outputs = { nixpkgs, home-manager, ... }: {
    homeConfigurations."yourusername" = home-manager.lib.homeManagerConfiguration {
      pkgs = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.x86_64-linux;
      modules = [ ./home.nix ];
    };
  };
}
```

Then update and rebuild:

```bash
nix flake update
home-manager switch --flake .
```

## Method 3: NixOS Module Integration

If you're using Home Manager as a NixOS module, update your system configuration:

```nix
# In your configuration.nix or flake.nix
{
  imports = [
    (builtins.fetchTarball "https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager/archive/release-25.05.tar.gz/nixos")
  ];

  # Your home-manager configuration
  home-manager.users.yourusername = { pkgs, ... }: {
    home.stateVersion = "25.05";
    # ... rest of your configuration
  };
}
```

Then rebuild your system:

```bash
sudo nixos-rebuild switch

> ```

Author: `Note:` If you're using Home Manager as a NixOS module (rather than standalone), you'll need to update your system configuration instead of running home-manager switch. Update the Home Manager input in your configuration.nix or flake, set home.stateVersion = "25.05" in your user configuration, and run sudo nixos-rebuild switch to apply the changes.`
Does it feels better ?

> ## Method 3: NixOS Module Integration
> 
> If you're using Home Manager as a NixOS module, update your system configuration:
> 
> ```nix
> # In your configuration.nix or flake.nix
> {
>   imports = [
>     (builtins.fetchTarball "https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager/archive/release-25.05.tar.gz/nixos")
>   ];
> 
>   # Your home-manager configuration
>   home-manager.users.yourusername = { pkgs, ... }: {
>     home.stateVersion = "25.05";
>     # ... rest of your configuration
>   };
> }
> ```
> 
> Then rebuild your system:
> 
> ```bash
> sudo nixos-rebuild switch
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
Note: If you're using Home Manager as a NixOS module (rather than standalone), you'll need to update your system configuration instead of running home-manager switch. Update the Home Manager input in your configuration.nix or flake, set home.stateVersion = "25.05" in your user configuration, and run sudo nixos-rebuild switch to apply the changes.
```

## Important: State Version Management

**⚠️ NEVER update your `home.stateVersion` when upgrading Home Manager channels!**

The `stateVersion` must remain set to the NixOS version you **first installed** Home Manager with:

```nix
{

>   # Keep your ORIGINAL stateVersion - don't change it!
>   home.stateVersion = "24.11";  # Example: if you first installed on 24.11

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  home.stateVersion = "24.11";  # Example: if you first installed on 24.11
```

}
```

> **Why?** The `stateVersion` ensures backward compatibility and prevents breaking changes from affecting your existing configuration.
> 
> **Remember:** Channel version ≠ State version. Update the channel, keep the `stateVersion` unchanged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Why?** The `stateVersion` ensures backward compatibility and prevents breaking changes from affecting your existing configuration.

**Remember:** Channel version ≠ State version. Update the channel, keep the `stateVersion` unchanged. Advanced users can view the changes between releases and see if any of the `stateVersion` changes will affect them and increment, if they migrate their configurations to follow the changed evaluation. 
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

> 1. **Version Mismatch Warning**: If you see warnings about version mismatches, ensure your Home Manager version matches your NixOS version.
> 
> 2. **Build Failures**: Some packages may have changed between versions. Check the [Home Manager release notes](https://nix-community.github.io/home-manager/release-notes.xhtml) for breaking changes.
> 
> 3. **Channel Not Found**: If `nix-channel --list` shows no channels, you might be using a different installation method (like flakes or NixOS module).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check the [Home Manager release notes](https://nix-community.github.io/home-manager/release-notes.xhtml) for breaking changes.

1. **Version Mismatch Warning**: If you see warnings about version mismatches, ensure your Home Manager version matches your NixOS version.
2. **Module Changes**: Modules are constantly being updated with new features to keep up with changes in upstream packaging or to fix bugs and add features. If you have an unexpected change, check if there was something noted in the release notes or news entries related. 
3. **Channel Not Found**: If `nix-channel --list` shows no channels, you might be using a different installation method (like flakes or NixOS module).
```

Replace the old channel with the NixOS 25.05 compatible version:

```bash
# Add new 25.05 channel
nix-channel --add https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager/archive/release-25.05.tar.gz home-manager

# Update channels
nix-channel --update
```

### Step 3: Apply the Changes

```bash
home-manager switch
```

## Method 2: Flake-Based Installation (Modern)

If you're using Home Manager with Nix flakes, update your `flake.nix`:

```nix
{
  description = "Home Manager configuration";

  inputs = {
    # Increment release branch for NixOS
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-25.05";
    home-manager = {
      # Follow corresponding `release` branch from Home Manager
      url = "github:nix-community/home-manager/release-25.05";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
  };

  outputs = { nixpkgs, home-manager, ... }: {
    homeConfigurations."yourusername" = home-manager.lib.homeManagerConfiguration {
      pkgs = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.x86_64-linux;
      modules = [ ./home.nix ];
    };
  };
}
```

Then update and rebuild:

```bash
nix flake update
# Standalone
home-manager switch --flake .
# Nixos module 
sudo nixos-rebuild switch
```

> ## Method 3: NixOS Module Integration
> 
> If you're using Home Manager as a NixOS module, update your system configuration:
> 
> ```nix
> # In your configuration.nix or flake.nix
> {
>   imports = [
>     (builtins.fetchTarball "https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager/archive/release-25.05.tar.gz/nixos")
>   ];
> 
>   # Your home-manager configuration
>   home-manager.users.yourusername = { pkgs, ... }: {
>     home.stateVersion = "25.05";
>     # ... rest of your configuration
>   };
> }
> ```
> 
> Then rebuild your system:
> 
> ```bash
> sudo nixos-rebuild switch
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
Note: If you're using Home Manager as a NixOS module (rather than standalone), you'll need to update your system configuration instead of running home-manager switch. Update the Home Manager input in your configuration.nix or flake, set home.stateVersion = "25.05" in your user configuration, and run sudo nixos-rebuild switch to apply the changes.
```
